---
title: Origins of Academic Stress in our current generation
date: 2021/6/18
description: Learn the underlying reasons as to the origins of academic stress in today's youth.
tag: Academic stress
author: You
---

![Singapore students say parental and self expectations, Fomo are sources of stress
](https://static1.straitstimes.com.sg/s3fs-public/styles/large30x20/public/articles/2021/07/31/hzstudent310721.jpg?VersionId=G0K_jhdIlaonlbrtJypVSOWqO0qULaBB)

&emsp;&emsp;Flawed interpretation and implementation of meritocratic measures within the education system, particularly at a young age where children are prematurely classed into different streams (N(T), N(A), Express, IP) and special programmes (GEP), and take tough national examinations (PSLE, O-, A-Levels). Hence, parents are falsely led to the belief that their children’s grades, ostensibly determined by a value, are inextricably linked to their inevitable success/failure in life. The 2018 Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) test by OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development) found that Singapore has the highest percentage (78%) of students agreeing that when they were failing, they doubt their plans for the future and 72% of students worry what others would think of them if they fail. PISA 2015 showed that Singaporean students’ anxiety levels were significantly higher than the OECD average for the following five questions regarding student wellbeing: "I often worry that it will be difficult for me to take a test" (86% of Singaporean students agreed, OECD average is 66%); "I worry I will get poor grades at school"; "I feel very anxious even if I am well prepared for a test"; "I get very tense when I study for a test"; and "I get nervous when I do not know how to solve a task at school". An extreme case would be a Primary 5 student jumping to his death because he went from passing all his assessments from Primary 1 to 4 to getting 50, 20.5, 53.8 and 12 out of 100 for English, Mathematics, Chinese and Higher Chinese respectively in Primary 5. He decided to take his own life after receiving 57.5 marks for Science as he did not meet his mother’s expectation of 70 marks. This shows that students in Singapore view their grades as extremely important, going so far as to take their own lives when unable to meet expectations placed upon them.

&emsp;&emsp;Seeing others with exemplary grades and curriculum vitae, children are forced to study excessively to keep up with unrealistic self-imposed expectations, leading to mental complications like astute depression.

&emsp;&emsp;In Finland, national and standardised examinations are kept to a minimum and there is minimal competition and comparison. According to the Finland’s 2015 National Institute for Health and Welfare's national survey, 9% of male and 18% of female students in upper secondary high school reported feelings of burnout. It is hence apparent that multiple national exams and the competitive nature of the Singapore education system is the main cause for academic stress.

&emsp;&emsp;Firstly, there is societal stigmatisation and overvaluation of absolute education. Singapore is an “exam meritocracy” whereby meritocracy is implemented to sieve out “better” students and reinforce the belief that academic excellence equates success. Singaporean society tenets on this belief and thus places utmost emphasis on academic validation.

&emsp;&emsp;There have been bell curves for important examinations for many years leading to people always trying to stay ahead of the bell curve, because it is very hard to set a target due to the fact that meeting the target does not necessarily mean success if the majority of students still do better than you. Students are academically driven to achieve as high marks as possible but that puts a lot of stress on them, essentially striving for perfection such that it becomes toxic perfectionism, where the student devotes all their time and energy into getting that one extra mark, sacrificing on their hobbies, relationships, sleep. They do not have time to do recreational activities to destress so stress accumulates until the student reaches critical point and implodes dangerously, leading to extreme decisions (suicide) or sudden development of mental health issues (depression, anxiety). Therefore the bell curve is innately unfair as there is no fixed standard and every students’ aim is to get full marks because the bellcurve is not linearly scaled.

&emsp;&emsp;This is exacerbated by the fact that foreign students and students who have extra resources, such as tuition, due to the contingencies of life, are advantaged. Foreign students generally come to Singapore solely to receive education and therefore put in maximum effort to secure the grades or certifications they set out to achieve. They may also not have family in Singapore, or other commitments and have more time to study and “grind”, These foreign students may also be more well versed in certain subjects (eg. Singapore’s Mandarin syllabus is relatively easy to Chinese students). In 2011, 18% of the total undergraduate intake in local universities were international students, going as high as 27% in Science and Engineering.

&emsp;&emsp;People with tuition are more likely to score better, because they are taught by tutors who have studied the system and know how to game it, and have more access to resources (notes, revision practices). These students are taught methods that give them an advantage. This is seen through PISA 2018 where socio-economically advantaged students outperformed disadvantaged students in reading by 104 score points, which is larger than the average difference between the two groups across OECD countries (89 score points).

&emsp;&emsp;43% of advantaged students but 10% of disadvantaged students, were top performers in reading, compared to the OECD average (17% of advantaged students and 3% of disadvantaged students). This stresses how socio-economic class largely impacts the amount of resources and help a student receives in their education journey.

&emsp;&emsp;Therefore, local students and students who do not have tuition are left behind and therefore struggle to beat the bell curve, resulting in increased stress levels.

&emsp;&emsp;Additionally, an observable trend is that the syllabus becomes increasingly difficult to master over the years. According to a TodayOnline article, Ms. Tiffany Goh commented: As a tutor, I can only say that the current syllabus is much more difficult than the earlier ones. Some students aren't able to handle the questions without guidance. School teachers are too overwhelmed, they are overworked. If the Ministry of Education wants to help, a review on the syllabus (and marking styles) will be a better idea than removing examinations. Other comments made by parents displayed a similar view that the past syllabus was much simpler, (eg. without the use of complex mathematical models), such that even well-educated parents may be unable to keep up with the current syllabus. Thus, students have to spend more time and effort to understand and master the material, which could be better spent on regulating their stress levels and mental health.

&emsp;&emsp;Secondly, authoritarian parents believe that the first step in achieving success is excelling academically. This is enforced through stringent methods (restricted screen time, constant surveillance, harsh punishment when failing to comply), leading to loss of freedom and privacy. Some parents also provide little support and guidance, leaving their children to struggle through life by themselves. Unnecessary comparisons also lead to low confidence, loss of motivation and added academic stress.

&emsp;&emsp;A study exploring the relationship between different parenting styles and self esteem in adolescents found that amongst the 4 categories of authoritarian, authoritative, indulgent/permissive and neglectful, the adolescents of authoritarian and neglectful families had the lowest score in all five aspects of the AF5 Multidimensional Self-Esteem Scale, which includes five dimensions of self esteem: Academic, Social, Emotional, Family, and Physical.

&emsp;&emsp;This shows how the parenting style can affect the emotional state of the student over time, leading to negative feelings of inadequacy and low self esteem.
